Docs: Add Explore guide for plugins (#24547)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/developers/plugins/add-support-for-explore-queries.md

+++
title = "Add support for Explore queries"
type = "docs"
+++

# Add support for Explore queries

> This guide explains how to add support for [Explore]({{< relref "../../features/explore.md" >}}) to an existing data source.

Reviewer: The last part of this sentence confuses me. Do you mean data source plugin?

This guide assumes that you're already familiar with how to [Build a data source plugin]({{< relref "../../../../../tutorials/build-a-data-source-plugin.md" >}}).

By adding support for Explore to your data source, users can make ad-hoc queries without the new of a dashboard. This is useful when users want to troubleshoot or to learn more about the data.

> To support Explore, your plugin needs to define a _query editor_ for Explore. Optionally, your plugin can also define a _start page_ for Explore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support Explore, your plugin needs to do one or both of the following:
* Define a _query editor_ for Explore. 
* Define a _start page_ for Explore.
```

Reviewer: What happens if they do both? Or is this an either/or?

Author: The query editor is mandatory, the start page is optional. Your suggestion suggests that you could write only a start page, which is possible, but has little meaning without the query editor.

> ## Add a query editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add a query editor for Explore
```

The query editor for Explore is similar to the query editor for the data source itself. In fact, you'll probably reuse the same components for both query editors.

> To create a query editor for Explore:

Reviewer: The colon at the end followed by a step that ends in a colon is weird. I suggest deleting this paragraph.

   ```

   ```ts
   export const plugin = new DataSourcePlugin<DataSource, MyQuery, MyDataSourceOptions>(DataSource)
     .setConfigEditor(ConfigEditor)
     .setQueryEditor(QueryEditor)
     .setExploreQueryField(ExploreQueryEditor);
   ```

1. Add a [QueryField]({{< relref "../../packages_api/ui/queryfield.md" >}}) to `ExploreQueryEditor`.

   ```ts
   import { QueryField } from '@grafana/ui';
   ```

   ```ts
   export default (props: Props) => {
     const { query } = props;

     const onQueryChange = (value: string, override?: boolean) => {
       const { query, onChange, onRunQuery } = props;

       if (onChange) {
         // Update the query whenever the query field changes.
         onChange({ ...query, queryText: value });

         // Run the query on Enter.
         if (override && onRunQuery) {
           onRunQuery();
         }
       }
     };

     return (
       <QueryField
         portalOrigin="mock-origin"
         onChange={onQueryChange}
         onRunQuery={props.onRunQuery}
         onBlur={props.onBlur}
         query={query.queryText || ''}
         placeholder="Enter a query"
       />
     );
   };
   ```

> ## Add a start page

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add an Explore start page
```

By adding an Explore start page for your plugin, you can for example create "cheat sheets" with commonly used queries. When the user clicks on one of the examples, it automatically updates the query editor, and runs the query. It's a great way to increase productivity for your users.

> To add a start page to your plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
